---
id: 83
title: 'Microsoft&rsquo;s Crisis in&nbsp;Perception (Part 3)'
date: 2010-07-10T17:30:12+00:00
author: JM
layout: post
guid: http://www.adamalthus.com/?p=83
permalink: /blog/2010/07/10/microsofts-crisis-in-perception-part-3/
aktt_notify_twitter:
  - no
categories:
  - Microsoft
  - Platforms
  - Strategy
format: aside
---
In&nbsp;the parts <a title="Part 1" href="http://www.adamalthus.com/2010/07/microsofts-crisis-of-perception-part1/" target="_self">1</a> and <a title="Part 2" href="http://www.adamalthus.com/2010/07/microsofts-crisis-of-perception-part2/" target="_self">2</a> of&nbsp;this series I&nbsp;made the case that Microsoft is&nbsp;mistaken for a&nbsp;consumer products company when, at&nbsp;the core it&nbsp;is&nbsp;really an&nbsp;enterprise software company.

This misalignment between reality and perception is&nbsp;largely self inflicted and continues to&nbsp;be&nbsp;be dangerously reinforced by&nbsp;Microsoft&rsquo;s marketing and&nbsp;PR machinery. The net effect of&nbsp;this 'Crisis in&nbsp;Perception' has been an&nbsp;undervaluing of&nbsp;the company&rsquo;s assets and a&nbsp;distraction which has prevented the management team from pursuing a&nbsp;more focused strategy which would unlock that value. In&nbsp;this chapter I&nbsp;will discuss some of&nbsp;the structural challenges facing the company today and how they combine to&nbsp;place limits on&nbsp;the company&rsquo;s room for maneuver.

When I&nbsp;joined the Microsoft in&nbsp;1994 the structures and decision making processes at&nbsp;the company were quite straightforward. There were product development groups who all answered to&nbsp;BillG and there were sales, marketing and support organizations who all answered to&nbsp;SteveB. The COO was responsible for making sure the bills got paid and things like manufacturing and distribution were run as&nbsp;efficiently as&nbsp;possible. There was only a&nbsp;small legal team and&nbsp;HR was there to&nbsp;help you identify the best talent to&nbsp;hire from outside and then to&nbsp;keep the talent happy when it&nbsp;joined the company.

Of&nbsp;course the company was far smaller then and with fewer employees operating across a&nbsp;much smaller number of&nbsp;geographies. In&nbsp;1995 Microsoft was ranked number 250 on&nbsp;the <a title="1995 Fortune 500" href="http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune500_archive/snapshots/1995/879.html" target="_blank">Fortune 500 list</a> with revenues of&nbsp;just over $4.5 Billion. In&nbsp;the intervening period the company has become a&nbsp;behemoth and will check in&nbsp;around $60 Billion dollars in&nbsp;revenue this year (Disclaimer: All the revenue numbers I&nbsp;discuss here are projections based on&nbsp;Microsoft published third quarter results and publicly available historic data available <a title="Microsoft Investor Relations" href="http://microsoft.com/msft" target="_blank">here</a>. I&nbsp;have no&nbsp;knowledge of&nbsp;fourth quarter FY'10 performance.) It&nbsp;is&nbsp;illuminating to&nbsp;compare the P&L performance for the 10 years prior to&nbsp;2000 and for the ten years since.

In&nbsp;the period fiscal year 1990 to&nbsp;1999 Microsoft&rsquo;s revenue grew 1665%. Operating expense grew by&nbsp;less than revenue 1207% contributing to&nbsp;a&nbsp;bottom line net income growth of&nbsp;a&nbsp;massive 2787% over that ten year period. At&nbsp;the same time R&D investment went up&nbsp;by&nbsp;1641% driven almost entirely by&nbsp;the company&rsquo;s push to&nbsp;become a&nbsp;credible player in&nbsp;the enterprise. Scarily, the cost of&nbsp;administering all of&nbsp;this growth accelerated faster than revenue at&nbsp;1833%. Finally, sales and marketing costs grew by&nbsp;1079% as&nbsp;the company expanded both its global presence and enterprise sales capabilities.

Now compare the period 1990&minus;1999 with the subsequent decade from fiscal 2000 to&nbsp;fiscal 2009. If&nbsp;you want to&nbsp;understand why the stock price has been depressed for so&nbsp;long these numbers tell the story. The company&rsquo;s top line revenue grew by&nbsp;only 255% during this period (Obviously the law of&nbsp;large numbers starts to&nbsp;kick in&nbsp;and a&nbsp;255% growth on&nbsp;Microsoft 2000 base revenue is&nbsp;a&nbsp;huge amount of&nbsp;revenue.) However, operating expenses during the same period outgrew revenue at&nbsp;319% (Ouch!) and as&nbsp;a&nbsp;result net income grew a&nbsp;paltry 155%, exactly 100% less than revenue. At&nbsp;the same time general and administrative (G&A) costs soared by&nbsp;352%, sales and marketing expense by&nbsp;312% and costs associated with getting all the revenue (Support, licensing, distribution, channel etc.) rose a&nbsp;whopping 405%. No&nbsp;wonder the stock hasn&rsquo;t done anything in&nbsp;10 years.

G&A costs as&nbsp;a&nbsp;percentage of&nbsp;revenue are one proxy for the 'Complexity' of&nbsp;a&nbsp;company. The simpler the business model, product line and organizations structure needed to&nbsp;take it&nbsp;to&nbsp;market the lower your G&A needs to&nbsp;be&nbsp;as a&nbsp;percentage of&nbsp;income. In&nbsp;the period '90-'99 G&A averaged 3% of&nbsp;revenue. In&nbsp;the period '00-'09 that ratio had nearly tripled to&nbsp;8%. G&A costs combined with the 'Cost of&nbsp;Revenue' and 'Sales and Marketing' lines is&nbsp;also a&nbsp;very good metric for efficiency. The fact that all of&nbsp;those costs grew substantially faster than top line revenue growth points to&nbsp;Microsoft facing its very own '<a title="Malthusian catastrophe" href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malthusian_catastrophe" target="_blank">Malthusian catastrophe</a>'. The situation is&nbsp;not sustainable and needs radical action today even more than it&nbsp;did in&nbsp;2000.

One of&nbsp;SteveB&rsquo;s first strategic decisions as&nbsp;CEO was the introduction of a&nbsp;GE like P&L structure. Each product group would become an 'Independent' division with it&rsquo;s own P&L meant to&nbsp;represent the true costs associated with building, marketing and selling each of&nbsp;the products. In&nbsp;my&nbsp;opinion, there were only one or&nbsp;two 'Minor' problems with this plan.

The health care, lighting and aircraft engines businesses at&nbsp;GE really are independent of&nbsp;each other. There is&nbsp;almost not overlap between the technology in&nbsp;their products or&nbsp;the markets into which they sell. Each of&nbsp;the GE&rsquo;s divisions has its own independent and dedicated sales and marketing resources. A&nbsp;strategic decision taken by&nbsp;the president of&nbsp;the health care business can be&nbsp;taken without reference to&nbsp;other divisions and with the knowledge that he&nbsp;or&nbsp;she has complete control over the execution of&nbsp;the strategy. The only thing&nbsp;GE Group cares about is&nbsp;whether a&nbsp;division meets it&rsquo;s revenue growth and profitability targets.

Microsoft&rsquo;s business is&nbsp;almost the antithesis of&nbsp;GE&rsquo;s. In&nbsp;2004 the company came up&nbsp;with the tag line '<a title="Microsoft Integrated Innovation" href="http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/features/2004/jul04/07-12integratedinnovation.mspx" target="_blank">Integrated Innovation</a>' which almost perfectly captured Microsoft&rsquo;s development philosophy in&nbsp;one compact phrase. It&nbsp;also put a&nbsp;dagger in&nbsp;the heart of&nbsp;any plan to&nbsp;run development divisions as&nbsp;truly independent businesses. The strategy of 'Integrated Innovation' creates such a&nbsp;dense web of&nbsp;interlocking dependencies between all of&nbsp;Microsoft&rsquo;s products that one division cannot sneeze without asking the permission of&nbsp;three other divisions first. 'Integrated Innovation' is&nbsp;absolutely the right strategy for an&nbsp;enterprise software company bent on&nbsp;meeting the needs of&nbsp;complex customers. However the strategy puts a&nbsp;straitjacket on&nbsp;any attempts to&nbsp;leverage your assets into other markets. Being held hostage to&nbsp;the 'Integrated Innovation' strategy is&nbsp;one of&nbsp;the primary reasons why Microsoft&rsquo;s previous Windows Mobile operating systems compared so&nbsp;badly to&nbsp;iOS and Android. (It&nbsp;remains to&nbsp;been seen whether Windows Phone 7 can break the bonds imposed by&nbsp;the 'Integrated Innovation' model.) The 'Integrated Innovation' messaging was also like red meat to&nbsp;the wolves of&nbsp;the Linux community and government regulatory classes who saw it&nbsp;as&nbsp;an attempt to&nbsp;leverage Microsoft&rsquo;s dominant position in&nbsp;one market to&nbsp;gain advantage in&nbsp;another.

The other difference between&nbsp;GE and Microsoft is&nbsp;how you get your products to&nbsp;market. Microsoft has one sales force which sells through partners but has a&nbsp;direct relationship with small, medium and large enterprises. Each of&nbsp;the 'Independent' product divisions has to&nbsp;negotiate access to&nbsp;the sales resources required to&nbsp;get a&nbsp;product in&nbsp;front of&nbsp;customers. The life of&nbsp;a&nbsp;front line sales person at&nbsp;Microsoft has become unbelievably complex. They are the one point in&nbsp;the whole messy business where Microsoft&rsquo;s product portfolio comes together and has to&nbsp;be&nbsp;integrated into a&nbsp;consistent conversation with the customer. Far from simplifying the business the new P&L model likely added complexity and cost due to&nbsp;the overhead in&nbsp;resources now needed to&nbsp;manage all the internal negotiations. No&nbsp;wonder all those operational expense items on&nbsp;the P&L have risen faster than income.

Then there&rsquo;s the issue of&nbsp;leadership talent. When Steve introduced the P&L model he&nbsp;made it&nbsp;clear that he&nbsp;was expecting the the divisional leaders to&nbsp;step up&nbsp;to&nbsp;the role of&nbsp;CEO for their businesses. That of&nbsp;course requires that the company had the skills in&nbsp;its existing management team to&nbsp;act and lead like CEOs. Its important to&nbsp;put the size of&nbsp;these businesses in&nbsp;context. The Windows and Office divisions will generate $18&minus;20 Billion revenue in&nbsp;2010. If&nbsp;those were independent companies they would rank no&nbsp;lower than 120 on&nbsp;the <a title="2010 Fortune 500" href="http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune500/2010/full_list/101_200.html" target="_blank">Fortune 500 list</a>. The server and tools division is a $13&minus;15 Billion revenue business which would rank no&nbsp;lower than 177 on&nbsp;the Fortune list if&nbsp;it&nbsp;was a&nbsp;separate company.

To&nbsp;be&nbsp;the CEO of&nbsp;any company of&nbsp;this size requires: The ability to&nbsp;define and articulate a&nbsp;clear and exciting vision of&nbsp;the future, excellence in&nbsp;personal communications, an&nbsp;outstanding ability to&nbsp;select and nurture talent, the confidence to&nbsp;admit your mistakes and learn from them and a&nbsp;deft 'political' sensibility amongst many others. Not quite the skill mix you find in&nbsp;most great engineers and yet most of&nbsp;the presidents running these mega-businesses today rose through Microsoft&rsquo;s engineering ranks. There are a&nbsp;few true superstars in&nbsp;this role like Stephen Elop who is&nbsp;a&nbsp;breath of&nbsp;fresh air but was hired in&nbsp;from outside where he&nbsp;already held a&nbsp;CEO position. As&nbsp;a&nbsp;shareholder I&nbsp;really do&nbsp;hope he&nbsp;can continue to&nbsp;thrive and succeed in&nbsp;the Microsoft culture.

As&nbsp;things were spiraling out of&nbsp;control in&nbsp;the early 2000s Steve made another management selection which proved controversial at&nbsp;the time. When it&nbsp;came time to&nbsp;pick a&nbsp;new Chief Operating Officer for Microsoft Steve reached out to&nbsp;an&nbsp;individual and an&nbsp;organization her knew well. His pick was Kevin Turner, then CEO of&nbsp;Wal-Mart's Sam&rsquo;s Club division.

Turner&rsquo;s selection was unorthodox. Here was someone whose entire mindset and expertise was defined by&nbsp;a&nbsp;lifelong career in&nbsp;a&nbsp;company with a&nbsp;completely unique world view; Sell simple products in&nbsp;huge volume to&nbsp;consumers whose primary value driver is&nbsp;low cost, and squeeze every last cent out of&nbsp;your operations no&nbsp;matter what the cost in&nbsp;terms of&nbsp;morale or&nbsp;relationship with your suppliers (If&nbsp;you are the largest retailer in&nbsp;the world then your suppliers depend on&nbsp;you, not the other way round.) Of&nbsp;course if&nbsp;you believe in&nbsp;the fallacy that Microsoft is&nbsp;or&nbsp;can become a&nbsp;consumer products company then Turner might be&nbsp;the perfect COO. On&nbsp;the other hand, if&nbsp;the reality is&nbsp;that your business depends on&nbsp;selling very complex enterprise software solutions to&nbsp;complex customers who expect care and feeding for the millions of&nbsp;dollars they spend with you, then perhaps you need a&nbsp;COO with a&nbsp;broader professional skill set.

Ironically, I&nbsp;defended the hiring of&nbsp;Turner at&nbsp;the time to&nbsp;my&nbsp;organization and anyone else that would listen. My&nbsp;view was that the sales organization in&nbsp;particular was in&nbsp;desperate need of&nbsp;some discipline and structure if&nbsp;we&nbsp;were ever to&nbsp;get cost of&nbsp;sales under control. To&nbsp;his credit, Turner did just that in&nbsp;his first two or&nbsp;three years, forcing everyone to&nbsp;adopt rigid new scorecard and revenue forecasting processes. However, as&nbsp;with all things there is&nbsp;a&nbsp;law of&nbsp;diminishing returns and ultimately other strategic issues which need to&nbsp;be&nbsp;balanced. Unfortunately if&nbsp;you have a 'Wal-Markian' world view then there is&nbsp;no&nbsp;such thing as&nbsp;a&nbsp;diminishing return. In&nbsp;the consumer retail business where margins run at&nbsp;5&minus;6% one more penny squeezed from the cost line makes a&nbsp;difference. In&nbsp;the world of&nbsp;complex enterprise software sales, squeezing another penny out of&nbsp;the cost line just demoralizes the talent in&nbsp;your sales team who you depend on&nbsp;to&nbsp;explain the complexity of&nbsp;your product offering to&nbsp;customers who spend millions of&nbsp;dollars with you every year.

In&nbsp;my&nbsp;view its a&nbsp;pity that Steve did not take the opportunity to&nbsp;shake Turner&rsquo;s hand, thank him for his great contributions and then let him go&nbsp;when his contract expired several months ago. If&nbsp;cost cutting becomes so&nbsp;endemic that the quality of&nbsp;your sales talent begins to&nbsp;decline and the 'Tyranny of&nbsp;the scorecard' becomes so&nbsp;stultifying that you leave no&nbsp;room for innovation and initiative, then your enterprise customer relationships and revenue will follow. If&nbsp;that happens Microsoft will enter a&nbsp;death spiral because there is&nbsp;no&nbsp;other business, not consumer, not on-line which can cover a&nbsp;shrinking enterprise business. In&nbsp;my&nbsp;opinion, we&rsquo;re entering a&nbsp;very dangerous phase where the rigidity enforced by&nbsp;the network of&nbsp;dependencies between products, and the ever decreasing freedom to&nbsp;innovate in&nbsp;the field, is&nbsp;severely impeding the company from finding any creative way out of&nbsp;it&rsquo;s very serious problems.

In&nbsp;the next and final chapter I&nbsp;will discuss some bright spots on&nbsp;the horizon and give my&nbsp;personal take on&nbsp;what strategy the company needs to&nbsp;pursue in&nbsp;order to&nbsp;achieve it&rsquo;s full potential.