---
id: 227
title: 'Why Sarah Friar is&nbsp;Wrong About Microsoft&rsquo;s 2011 Growth Prospects'
date: 2010-12-14T15:01:49+00:00
author: Jonathan
layout: post
guid: http://www.adamalthus.com/?p=227
permalink: /blog/2010/12/14/why-sarah-friar-is-wrong/
aktt_notify_twitter:
  - no
categories:
  - Cloud
  - Futures
  - Microsoft
  - Platforms
  - Strategy
---
Goldman Sachs' analyst Sara Friar is&nbsp;at&nbsp;it again. <!--more-->In&nbsp;her latest research note she declares that Microsoft will face a&nbsp;very tough 2011. She projects that top line revenue growth will slip to&nbsp;seven percent from twelve percent this year.

I&rsquo;m not in&nbsp;the market valuation guessing game so&nbsp;her projections may end up&nbsp;being correct. However, if&nbsp;that&rsquo;s the case then it&nbsp;will be&nbsp;a&nbsp;matter of&nbsp;pure luck on&nbsp;her part. Friar&rsquo;s analysis of&nbsp;what 'ails' Microsoft demonstrates such a&nbsp;fundamental lack of&nbsp;understanding about the core drives of&nbsp;Microsoft&rsquo;s business that it&nbsp;borders on&nbsp;the incompetent. Even that would be&nbsp;OK if&nbsp;her analysis did not influence millions, if&nbsp;not billions, of&nbsp;dollars of&nbsp;investment in&nbsp;Microsoft stock. Joe Wilcox, a&nbsp;frequent critic of&nbsp;Microsoft strategy, has a <a title="Joe Wilcox" href="http://www.betanews.com/joewilcox/article/Ill-tell-you-something-about-Microsoft/1292301019?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+bn+%28Betanews+Full+Content+Feed+-+BN%29&utm_content=Google+Reader" target="_blank">lengthy piece</a> on&nbsp;why Friar is&nbsp;wrong so I&rsquo;m not going to&nbsp;cover the same ground.

Disclosure: After December 31st I&nbsp;will have no&nbsp;personal financial interest in&nbsp;Microsoft. In&nbsp;a&nbsp;very real sense I&nbsp;have no&nbsp;vested interest in&nbsp;what happens to&nbsp;the company in&nbsp;2011 and beyond except in&nbsp;wanting the company to&nbsp;remain successful for the sake of&nbsp;my&nbsp;friends who still work for the company. However, no&nbsp;matter what my&nbsp;loyalties are on&nbsp;the subject, in&nbsp;my&nbsp;opinion Friar is&nbsp;just plain wrong in&nbsp;her analysis and needs to&nbsp;be&nbsp;called on&nbsp;it.

Here&rsquo;s where I&nbsp;think Friar&rsquo;s analysis is&nbsp;materially incorrect:

  1. Friar seems not to&nbsp;understand that Microsoft is&nbsp;an&nbsp;enterprise software company -As I&nbsp;wrote <a href="http://www.adamalthus.com/2010/07/why-its-time-to-break-up-microsoft/" target="_blank">here,</a> <a href="http://www.adamalthus.com/?p=39" target="_blank">here</a>, <a href="http://www.adamalthus.com/?p=46" target="_blank">here</a>, <a href="http://www.adamalthus.com/?p=83" target="_blank">here</a> and <a href="http://www.adamalthus.com/?p=98" target="_blank">here</a>&nbsp;&mdash; and not a&nbsp;consumer products company. Microsoft&rsquo;s 2011 growth prospects hinge on&nbsp;continuation of&nbsp;the corporate upgrade cycle, re-platforming and general investment in&nbsp;business&nbsp;IT. The economy is&nbsp;hopefully emerging from the bottom of&nbsp;an&nbsp;economic cycle and corporate profits are at&nbsp;record highs. The combination of&nbsp;those two facts creates a&nbsp;very healthy outlook for corporate&nbsp;IT investment and, as&nbsp;a&nbsp;consequence, for Microsoft.
  2. Friar is&nbsp;correct that Microsoft&rsquo;s strategic failure to&nbsp;have an&nbsp;competitive entry in&nbsp;the nascent tablet market hurts growth prospects: Microsoft has lost the ability to&nbsp;drive incremental growth by&nbsp;tapping a&nbsp;new market opportunity. That is&nbsp;not the same as&nbsp;prognosticating that tablets will reduce growth in&nbsp;Microsoft existing markets. They will not, in&nbsp;2011 anyway.
  3. There is&nbsp;no&nbsp;evidence that tablets are cannibalizing traditional&nbsp;PC or&nbsp;laptop sales. That may change in&nbsp;2011 but as&nbsp;it&nbsp;stands today Microsoft&rsquo;s core business does not grow less because of&nbsp;tablets. Tablets, and by&nbsp;that we&nbsp;mean the iPad&nbsp;&mdash; because everyone else still has to&nbsp;prove they can compete&nbsp;&mdash; are a&nbsp;NEW category. My&nbsp;iPad does not replace my&nbsp;MacBook Pro, it&nbsp;adds value to&nbsp;it. Tablets will remain an&nbsp;add-on purchase to&nbsp;an&nbsp;individuals desktop or&nbsp;laptop needs. That may change as&nbsp;tablet functionality and features improve in&nbsp;2012 and beyond but that will have very little impact on&nbsp;Microsoft in&nbsp;2011. Hopefully by&nbsp;2012 the company and it&nbsp;partners, will have their tablet act together.
  4. Friar&rsquo;s conclusions about Microsoft and the cloud demonstrate her most egregious lack of&nbsp;understanding of&nbsp;either the technology, market or&nbsp;Microsoft. Maybe she&rsquo;s been reading too many Google press releases. By&nbsp;all independent evaluation, Microsoft has the most complete and comprehensive set of&nbsp;Cloud offerings in&nbsp;the market today. Google can only dream of&nbsp;the opportunity facing Microsoft as&nbsp;it&nbsp;moves its current installed base of&nbsp;enterprise customers to&nbsp;the cloud. In&nbsp;doing so&nbsp;Microsoft secures a&nbsp;higher more stable and sustainable revenue stream than it&nbsp;could ever have dreamed of&nbsp;in&nbsp;the packaged software business. It&nbsp;is&nbsp;true that the margins for cloud service provision are less obscene than those realized when shipping a&nbsp;customer a&nbsp;DVD. However, that will change as&nbsp;the next generation of&nbsp;Microsoft&rsquo;s cloud service infrastructure comes online. If&nbsp;Microsoft has a&nbsp;track record on&nbsp;anything it&nbsp;is&nbsp;squeezing cost out of&nbsp;its operations. Margin reductions is&nbsp;also offset by&nbsp;the huge portfolio expansion opportunities presented when a&nbsp;customer migrates to&nbsp;the cloud&nbsp;&mdash; when the cost of&nbsp;upgrading falls to&nbsp;zero customer feel a&nbsp;lot more comfortable buying more and more of&nbsp;your product. The latest win at <a href="http://www.zdnet.com/blog/microsoft/microsoft-and-the-usda-may-the-best-incumbent-win/8169" target="_blank">USDA</a> proves just how powerful a&nbsp;position Microsoft has as&nbsp;the incumbent and what a&nbsp;roadblock that is&nbsp;to&nbsp;Google&rsquo;s ambitions.

Friar is&nbsp;correct about one thing&nbsp;&mdash; It&nbsp;is&nbsp;time for Microsoft to&nbsp;start handing out a&nbsp;much larger dividend. There are few potential acquisitions that would increase shareholder value&nbsp;&mdash; Twitter aside&nbsp;&mdash; that would eat into the growing horde of&nbsp;cash. Add to&nbsp;that the company&rsquo;s senior executive obsession with flushing money down the toilet, trying to&nbsp;prove their consumer credentials&nbsp;&mdash; Windows Phone 7 anyone&nbsp;&mdash; and you have every justification for shareholders to&nbsp;demand more of&nbsp;those profits be&nbsp;returned to&nbsp;their wallets.

As&nbsp;I&nbsp;have already <a href="http://www.adamalthus.com/2010/07/why-its-time-to-break-up-microsoft/" target="_blank">written</a> my&nbsp;holiday wish is&nbsp;for SteveB to&nbsp;realize its time to&nbsp;break the company up&nbsp;and start focusing&nbsp;&mdash; without distraction&nbsp;&mdash; on&nbsp;the enterprise business upon which Microsoft&rsquo;s long-term future and growth depends. In&nbsp;this regard, Friar and I&nbsp;probably agree but it&rsquo;s only a&nbsp;wish and I&nbsp;don&rsquo;t believe in&nbsp;Santa or&nbsp;the Tooth Fairy.