---
id: 46
title: 'Microsoft&rsquo;s Crisis of&nbsp;Perception (Part 2)'
date: 2010-07-08T14:03:35+00:00
author: JM
layout: post
guid: http://www.adamalthus.com/?p=46
permalink: /blog/2010/07/08/microsofts-crisis-of-perception-part2/
aktt_notify_twitter:
  - no
thesis_description:
  - In Part 1 of this post I explained why I do not believe Microsoft is a consumer products company and some of the strategic perception issus this causes for the company. In part 2 I will discuss the business Microsoft is really in and how that has come to dominate strategic decision making at the company.
thesis_no_description:
  - 1
thesis_keywords:
  - Microsoft Enterprise Strategy
categories:
  - Microsoft
  - Platforms
  - Strategy
format: aside
---
In <a title="Part 1" href="http://www.adamalthus.com/2010/07/microsofts-crisis-of-perception-part1/" target="_self">Part 1</a> of&nbsp;this post I&nbsp;explained why I&nbsp;do&nbsp;not believe Microsoft is&nbsp;a&nbsp;consumer products company and some of&nbsp;the strategic perception issues this causes for the company. In&nbsp;part 2 I&nbsp;will discuss the business Microsoft is&nbsp;really in&nbsp;and how that has come to&nbsp;dominate strategic decision making at&nbsp;the company.

Before I&nbsp;move on&nbsp;I&nbsp;wanted to&nbsp;thank my&nbsp;old friend Alan Yates for pointing out that I&nbsp;was incorrect to&nbsp;state that Microsoft never had been a&nbsp;consumer products company. He&nbsp;is&nbsp;of course correct. Alan was a&nbsp;1990 veteran of&nbsp;the company and he&nbsp;pointed out that it&nbsp;was in&nbsp;1990 that Microsoft first hit $1Billion in&nbsp;retail sales. That is&nbsp;individual users and small business owners picking up&nbsp;shrink-wrapped product from a&nbsp;store shelf which, by&nbsp;my&nbsp;previous definition, makes you every bit a&nbsp;consumer company. Alan went on&nbsp;to&nbsp;point out that it&nbsp;was very shortly after this milestone that the company embarked on&nbsp;a&nbsp;fundamentally new growth strategy which would redefine the company and its market focus.

So&nbsp;what business is&nbsp;Microsoft in? In&nbsp;a&nbsp;colloquial sense Microsoft is&nbsp;in&nbsp;the 'Plumbing' business. Doing 'Plumbing' is&nbsp;not sexy or&nbsp;exciting, it&nbsp;does not get you many front page headlines nor does it&nbsp;excite consumers but doing it&nbsp;well does satisfy the goose that has been laying golden eggs for the last fifteen years. The goose has a&nbsp;name and it&rsquo;s called the Enterprise. Making the goose happy generates billions and billions of&nbsp;dollars for the company every year.

When Alan joined the company in&nbsp;1990 he&nbsp;worked on&nbsp;a&nbsp;project to&nbsp;bring a&nbsp;new version of&nbsp;windows to&nbsp;market. That version was called Windows for Workgroups. At&nbsp;that same time I&nbsp;was working for an&nbsp;Oil company running the&nbsp;PC support group. I&nbsp;can remember the joy of&nbsp;finally being able to&nbsp;install a&nbsp;version of&nbsp;Windows that started to&nbsp;address many of&nbsp;the configuration challenges we&nbsp;faced in&nbsp;trying to&nbsp;deploy Windows inside a&nbsp;large enterprise organization. WfW was Microsoft&rsquo;s first product step on&nbsp;the long road to&nbsp;becoming the worlds largest enterprise software vendor. I&nbsp;joined the company in&nbsp;July 1994 and the group I&nbsp;belonged to&nbsp;became the first dedicated enterprise sales and marketing organization six months later. The brilliance of&nbsp;the strategy and the strength of&nbsp;the products which enabled Microsoft to&nbsp;grow that kernel from zero a&nbsp;dominant portion of&nbsp;Microsoft&rsquo;s revenue stream is&nbsp;rarely recognized but important to&nbsp;understand.

As&nbsp;with any business strategy which spans fifteen years, lots of&nbsp;things change, dead ends are driven down and the whole complex business evolves beyond recognition. However, some very core strategies have remained central. At&nbsp;risk of&nbsp;over-stretching my&nbsp;previous analogy I&rsquo;d like to&nbsp;go&nbsp;back and talk about 'Plumbing'. Microsoft would identify a 'Building' (Competitor) with tenants (Enterprise customers) who were stuck with inflexible and generally complex 'Plumbing' (Server, Messaging, Database software.) The pipes were all different sizes and took huge amounts of&nbsp;money to&nbsp;force them to&nbsp;fit together and to&nbsp;stop them from leaking. Tenants were enticed to&nbsp;move into a&nbsp;a&nbsp;shiny new building (Microsoft) where all the plumbing was designed to&nbsp;work together, be&nbsp;efficient and to&nbsp;not leak. In&nbsp;exchange for moving in&nbsp;all the customer had to&nbsp;do&nbsp;was sign a&nbsp;three year lease (Enterprise license agreement) with the option to&nbsp;renew or&nbsp;move out at&nbsp;the end of&nbsp;the term. There was only one small problem with this strategy; the company needed to&nbsp;start delivering 'Plumbing' that would increasingly meet these customer&rsquo;s very complex and evolving needs. It&nbsp;was the very deep process of&nbsp;engagement with these enterprise customers that slowly mutated the original consumer focused DNA into the form we&nbsp;find today.

Early in&nbsp;my&nbsp;career with the company I&nbsp;was responsible for hosting the very first series of&nbsp;Enterprise Chief Information Officer Roundtables in&nbsp;Redmond. We&nbsp;would fly in&nbsp;CIOs from some of&nbsp;our most important large enterprise customers, put them in&nbsp;a&nbsp;conference room for two days and wheel each of&nbsp;the product group executives in&nbsp;front of&nbsp;them for a&nbsp;lengthy debate about their needs and the deficiencies of&nbsp;Microsoft&rsquo;s products. Each session was closed with a&nbsp;two hour session with Steve Ballmer and occasionally BillG. To&nbsp;see Steve in&nbsp;this type of&nbsp;engagement is&nbsp;to&nbsp;see him at&nbsp;his absolute best. He&nbsp;would arrive with notepad and pen; listen intently to&nbsp;the customer complaints, push back politely when he&nbsp;thought necessary, explain his thinking and strategy and would always leave the customer satisfied and wanting further engagement at&nbsp;this level. After those meetings Steve would go&nbsp;back to&nbsp;his office and fire off a&nbsp;long series of&nbsp;emails to&nbsp;BillG and the relevant divisional executives telling them what he&nbsp;had heard from the customers and what needed to&nbsp;be&nbsp;done to&nbsp;satisfy these very important customers.

The 'Virtuous' cycle of&nbsp;customer engagement in&nbsp;product design is&nbsp;compelling: The influence of&nbsp;very large enterprise customers on&nbsp;product design meant that increasingly Microsoft&rsquo;s products became a&nbsp;closer and closer fit for their needs. As&nbsp;a&nbsp;result the revenue base from these customers grew dramatically which further cemented their importance and the need to&nbsp;listen to&nbsp;them. Furthermore once the world&rsquo;s largest companies, with all their vast complexity, use and trust your products it&nbsp;becomes the best endorsement for all the other smaller enterprise customers to&nbsp;do&nbsp;the same. It&nbsp;used to&nbsp;be&nbsp;said that a&nbsp;CIO would never get fired for picking IBM. Remarkably, during the first decade of&nbsp;this century choosing Microsoft as&nbsp;your enterprise software vendor has become the accepted low risk choice for most CIOs around the world and Microsoft&rsquo;s growing stream of&nbsp;enterprise revenue reflects that reality.

This series of&nbsp;posts is&nbsp;titled a&nbsp;&laquo;Crisis of&nbsp;Perception.&raquo; The most common 'Perception' issue facing the company, and the one most frequently stated, is&nbsp;that Microsoft does not innovate. The problem with most of&nbsp;these accusations is&nbsp;that they are leveled by&nbsp;members of&nbsp;the 'Digerati' who almost always use consumer products as&nbsp;their frame of&nbsp;reference. What these commentators mean is&nbsp;that Microsoft does a&nbsp;lousy job of&nbsp;bringing 'Shiny Objects' and compelling consumer experiences to&nbsp;market. In&nbsp;that regard they are correct. However, I&nbsp;hope it&nbsp;is&nbsp;now clear that this is&nbsp;not the business Microsoft is&nbsp;in. Sit down with an&nbsp;executive from IBM, Oracle, VMWare or&nbsp;SalesForce and ask them 'Off the record' if&nbsp;they believe Microsoft innovates. If&nbsp;they are being honest you&rsquo;ll get a&nbsp;good deal of&nbsp;acknowledgment that indeed Microsoft has and continues to&nbsp;deliver a&nbsp;huge amount of&nbsp;innovation. This continued flow of&nbsp;innovation driven by&nbsp;the intimate relationship Microsoft has with its largest customers and the resulting revenue stream this drives is&nbsp;a&nbsp;very real competitive advantage and a&nbsp;very real threat to&nbsp;the company&rsquo;s competitors.

Innovation is&nbsp;not just about what new 'Functionality' you build into the next version of&nbsp;your products. How you market, sell, license, deploy, and support are all valid areas for innovation. I&nbsp;would argue that not only is&nbsp;there a&nbsp;huge amount of&nbsp;genuine technical innovation at&nbsp;the core of&nbsp;Microsoft&rsquo;s enterprise product portfolio but the company&rsquo;s innovations in&nbsp;its overall business model have fundamentally transformed the global enterprise software business.

Microsoft&rsquo;s core 'Perception' problem is&nbsp;that innovation in 'Plumbing' is&nbsp;not very visible or&nbsp;exciting. If&nbsp;you want the proof of&nbsp;this then watch any on-line video of&nbsp;a&nbsp;Microsoft executive trying to&nbsp;demonstrate fail-over clustering, systems management or&nbsp;large scale database technology. These are generally not existing presentations. However the peace of&nbsp;mind and the problems that these innovations solve for enterprise customers are worth many millions of&nbsp;dollars in&nbsp;incremental revenue to&nbsp;the company.

Far from being a&nbsp;company that does not innovate Microsoft may be&nbsp;the poster child for the '<a href="http://www.amazon.com/Innovators-Dilemma-Revolutionary-Business-Essentials/dp/0060521996?tag=adamalthus-20 " target="_blank" rel="nofollow">Innovator&rsquo;s Dilemma</a>'. The strategic question facing the company today is&nbsp;whether such a&nbsp;heavy dependence on&nbsp;the enterprise revenue stream is&nbsp;a&nbsp;blessing or&nbsp;a&nbsp;curse and how do&nbsp;you avoid killing the goose that laid the golden eggs as&nbsp;you attempt to&nbsp;enter new markets? That is&nbsp;the central challenge facing Microsoft&rsquo;s executive ranks today.

In <a title="Part 3" href="http://www.adamalthus.com/2010/07/microsofts-crisis-of-perception-part3/" target="_self">part 3</a> I&nbsp;will take a&nbsp;look at&nbsp;some of&nbsp;the structural issues facing the company&rsquo;s today and impacting its ability to&nbsp;address a&nbsp;series of&nbsp;critical challenges.