---
id: 421
title: 2012 Predictions
date: 2012-01-02T08:45:36+00:00
author: Jonathan
layout: post
guid: http://www.adamalthus.com/?p=421
permalink: /blog/2012/01/02/2012-predictions/
aktt_notify_twitter:
  - yes
image:
  - 
quote-author:
  - Unknown
quote-url:
  - http://
quote-copy:
  - Unknown
audio:
  - http://
link-url:
  - http://
aktt_tweeted:
  - 1
categories:
  - Apple
  - ARM
  - Cloud
  - Competition
  - Futures
  - Gadgets
  - Intel
  - Microsoft
  - Oracle
  - Platforms
  - SAP
  - Strategy
tags:
  - 2012 Predictions
  - Technology Industry
---
Just for fun&nbsp;&mdash; and in&nbsp;no&nbsp;particular order&nbsp;&mdash; here are some technology industry predictions for 2012.<!--more-->

  1. Microsoft (MSFT) stock will continue to&nbsp;flatline until there is&nbsp;a&nbsp;generational change in&nbsp;management and strategy.
  2. Windows 8 tablets will impress, will gain share but will be&nbsp;unable to&nbsp;dent the iPad&rsquo;s dominant position.
  3. Windows 8 client will underwhelm in&nbsp;the enterprise as&nbsp;customers tire of&nbsp;client side upgrade cycles.
  4. Microsoft will&nbsp;&mdash; depending on&nbsp;1 above&nbsp;&mdash; hand the Windows Phone 7 platform to&nbsp;Nokia and get out of&nbsp;the mobile phone&nbsp;OS business.
  5. Nokia has a&nbsp;chance of&nbsp;survival if&nbsp;it&nbsp;gets exclusive control over the Windows Phone platform. If&nbsp;not then Microsoft will have to&nbsp;double down and acquire Nokia.
  6. The recent earnings miss by&nbsp;Oracle (ORCL) is&nbsp;just the leading indicator of&nbsp;a&nbsp;greater decline to&nbsp;come driven by&nbsp;customer migrations to&nbsp;cloud, Software As&nbsp;A&nbsp;Service and other&nbsp;DB alternatives.
  7. SAP has reached saturation in&nbsp;the enterprise and will continue to&nbsp;be&nbsp;unsuccessful moving into the small and mid-sized market. Acquisitions will not help them grow.
  8. ARM will continue to&nbsp;eat Intel&rsquo;s lunch in&nbsp;the mobile chip business and will make significant gains in&nbsp;the server segment.
  9. Intel will continue failing to&nbsp;make up&nbsp;in&nbsp;volume for what they are losing in&nbsp;margin&nbsp;&mdash; INTC stock will suffer accordingly.
 10. Google (GOOG) will continue to&nbsp;demonstrate that it&nbsp;is&nbsp;&mdash; as&nbsp;it&nbsp;always has been&nbsp;&mdash; a 'One Trick Search Pony' and the shine will come off its elevated valuation.